Private Residential Tenancy Agreement



TENANT

Name(s) and Address(es):
Lucas Bello
Address: Queen Margaret University Residential Village, Edinburgh

(“the Tenant(s)”)  
Where this is a joint tenancy, the term “Tenant” applies to each of the individuals above and the full responsibilities and rights set out in this Agreement apply to each Tenant who will be jointly and severally liable for all of the obligations of the Tenant under this Agreement.      

Email address(es):  
077061156
Telephone number(s): 
1belloluc@gmail.com

LANDLORD
Name (1): Orchard & Oak Property Ltd
	       (“the Landlord(s)”) 
Address (1): 
57 Ballater Drive 
Glasgow	 
G61 1BZ

Email address(es):  
(1) candice.zhao28@outlook.com
(2) jarvishuman@gmail.com Telephone number(s):
07453267094 (Director of Orchard & Oak Property Ltd Dr. Youqian Candice Zhao)
07585703367 (Director of Orchard & Oak Property Ltd Dr. Jacques Human)

Registration number (Landlord 1): [569018/230/10081]	

COMMUNICATION 

The Landlord and Tenant agree that all communications which may or must be made under the Act and in relation to this Agreement, including notices to be served by one party on the other will be made in writing using:

   hard copy by personal delivery or recorded delivery; or

 X  the email addresses set out in clauses [2 or 3] and 1].


For communication by email it is essential that the Landlord(s) and Tenant(s) consider carefully whether this option is suitable for them.  It should be noted that all notices will be sent by email, which includes important documents such as a rent-increase notice and a notice to leave the Let Property.

To ensure all emails can be received and read in good time, the Landlord(s) and Tenant(s) agree to inform each other as soon as possible of any new email address which is to be used instead of the email address notified in this Agreement. 

If sending a document electronically or by recorded delivery post, the document will be regarded as having been received 48 hours after it was sent, unless the receiving party can provide proof that he or she received it later than this.  This extra delivery time should be factored into any required notice period.   

DETAILS OF THE LET PROPERTY

Address
Flat 7
166 Causewayside
Edinburgh
EH9 1PJ
 
 (“the Let Property”)

Type of property:
FLAT

Any other areas/facilities included with the Let Property:
	 				
 
Any shared areas/facilities:
Backyard 
Any excluded areas/facilities:
	 				
 
The Let Property is furnished.  See the Inventory and Record of Condition for further details.

The Let Property is not located in a rent pressure zone.

If Scottish Ministers have designated the area that the Let Property is located in as a rent pressure zone, there will be a cap on the amount that the rent can be increased.  You can check whether the Let Property shown above is located in a rent pressure zone on the Scottish Government’s website https://www.mygov.scot/rent-pressure-zone-checker/

The Let Property is not a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO).  



START DATE OF THE TENANCY
	
The private residential tenancy will start on: _16_/_05_/_2024_
							(“the start date of the tenancy”)


OCCUPATION AND USE OF THE LET PROPERTY

The Tenant agrees to continue to occupy the Let Property as his or her home and must obtain the Landlord’s written permission before carrying out any trade, business or profession there. 


RENT 

The rent is £835 a calendar month payable in advance

The first payment will be paid by _05_/_05_/_2024_ and will be for the sum of £1670 in respect of the period _16_/_05_/_2024_ to _15_/_06_/_2024 and the deposit. (The maximum amount of rent which can be paid in advance is 6 months’ rent.)

Thereafter payments of £835 must be received on/before  15th of each calendar month and then subsequently on or before the same date each calendar month thereafter. 

Method by which rent is to be paid: bank transfer (This is the preferred method but rent may be paid using another method if it is reasonable in the circumstances.)

The following services are included in the rent amount noted above:  
		
	 		
	 		


RENT RECEIPTS

Where any payment of rent is made in cash, the Landlord must provide the Tenant with a dated written receipt for the payment stating: the amount paid, and either (as the case may be) the amount which remains outstanding, or confirmation that no further amount remains outstanding. 



RENT INCREASES

The rent cannot be increased more than once in any twelve month period and the Landlord must give the Tenant at least three months’ notice before any increase can take place.  In order to increase the rent, the Landlord must give the Tenant a rent-increase notice, the content of which is set out in ‘The Private Residential Tenancies (Prescribed Notices and Forms) (Scotland) Regulations 2017’. The notice will be sent using the communication method agreed in the ‘Communication’ clause above.

Within 21 days of receiving a rent-increase notice, the Tenant can refer the increase to a rent officer for adjudication if he or she considers that the rent increase amount is unreasonable, unless the property is located in a rent pressure zone (RPZ).  Before submitting a referral to a rent officer for rent adjudication, the Tenant must complete Part 3 of the rent-increase notice and return it to his or her Landlord to notify the Landlord of his or her intention to make a referral to a rent officer.   Failure to return Part 3 to the Landlord will mean that the rent increase will take effect from the date proposed in the notice.

If the Let property is located within a rent pressure zone, the Tenant cannot refer a rent increase to a rent officer as Scottish Ministers will have set a cap on the maximum amount the rent can be increased.  


DEPOSIT 


At the start date of the tenancy or before, a deposit of £835 will be paid by the Tenant to the Landlord. The Landlord will issue a receipt for the deposit to the Tenant. No interest shall be paid by the Landlord to the Tenant for the deposit.  

By law, the deposit amount cannot exceed the equivalent of two months’ rent and cannot include any premiums. For example, charging for an administration fee or taking a holding fee (regardless of whether or not the holding fee is refundable).  

The scheme administrator is My|deposits Scotland and 

their contact details are:
http://www.mydepositsscotland.co.uk/
info@mydepositsscotland.co.uk 
0333 321 9402
